---
title:  "Considering the Catenary"
mathjax: true
layout: post
---

## The Catenary

I've recently spent some time applying the calculus of variations to the classic problem of the catenary. For the uninitiated, the catenary is the curve that will be formed by hanging some rope or chain between two poles.

We often see this form in our everyday lives, be it telephone wires of rope barriers meant to section off different areas. Given its ubiquity in the day-to-do, one might assume that the catenary is a trivial problem to consider. However, this turns out to not be the case, and in fact has rich physical and mathematical content.

In the end however, it was not the physical content that has driven me to share this problem. Instead, it is due to the mathematical elegance that falls out during the process. I hope you will share in my appreciation for what follows.

As a final note, my work toward a solution will assume familiarity with standard calculus and the calculus of variations.

## The Problem Setup

We consider a chain of mass density \\(\rho\\) and length \\(\ell\\) hanging from hooks fixed to the top of two poles a distance of \\(\frac{\ell}{2}\\) apart. Further, we assume that we are working in a uniform gravitational field with gravitational acceleration \\(g\\) and we fix the poles at \\(x=\pm\frac{\ell}{4}\\). We then define the height, \\(y\\), at which the chain is fixed to the poles as \\(y=0\\).

We now would like to define a functional for the potential energy so that we may minimize it, as our expectation is for the catenary to be the configuration which is energetically favorable (i.e. minimized).

We can intuitively consider cutting up the chain into infinitesimal slices of mass, \\(dm\\), such that summing over all of the infinitesimal pieces yields the total mass. This is equivalent to considering an infinitesimal length piece of the chain, which comes with some fixed density, and then summing up over the whole length to get the total mass. Hence, we have \\(dm = \rho ds\\). Using this idea to define gravitational potential energy, we have 

\begin{equation}U = \int ds \rho g y = \int dx \rho g y\sqrt{1 + y'^2}.\end{equation}

Note that we have made use of the metric 

\begin{equation}ds^2 = dx^2 + dy^2.\end{equation}

Now, we observe that our system is subject to the constraint that the chain is of fixed length $\ell$. In other words, the arc length of the chain is a constant 

\begin{equation}\ell = \int dx \sqrt{1+y'^2}.\end{equation}

Since we have a constraint on our system, we need to employ Lagrange multipliers so that we can define a functional which takes into account the energy minimization and our constraint. Putting this all together yields 

\begin{equation}J = \int dx (\rho gy - \lambda)\sqrt{1+y'^2}.\end{equation}

## Solving the Problem

Now that we have setup the problem, we can get on with the mathematics. Since the endpoints of the chain are fixed, we may directly apply the Euler-Lagrange equations. However, we observe that the function inside of the integral has no explicit dependece on \\(x\\). Thus, we may use the first integral

\begin{equation}f - y'\frac{\partial f}{y'} = a,\end{equation}

where \\(a\\) is a constant.